Hidden Screen Key List

This useful article full of tips for the less obvious bits of many famous
demos was first seen in Undercover Mag.. As Undercover is primarily a
German language production with little exposure in the general scene, we
thought it would be a good idea to share this information with the readers
of Maggie..We hope the Undercover Team don't mind us doing this, this
article is credited to them obviously.. (If they want to get in touch with
us for any reason, then please write!)

Anyway, many of the tips are more or less well known to most people, but
there are also some that we've never seen before.. How about the spinning
cube trick for the Synergy Megademo?? Time to get those ST demos out once
more! - CiH.. Jan '96..

UNDERCOVER HIDDENSCREEN AND KEYS LIST

In this list we'll collect all cheats and tips to get the hidden screens
etc of demos,mags etc.

A Grumbler in the Rutting Season (Electricity)

Alternative menu.. Press HELP

Hidden screen..

Copy the file "Loadthis.Not" to an extra disc and rename it in
"Loadthis.Prg". Start.... Or with our loader/patch on the stuff-disc of
UCM1. (Undercover Mag 1)

Coding so far (The Megabusters)

Hidden screen..

Go right in the mainmenu. Near the mushroom at the sign with the
inscription "Data Disc" go left and press SPACE before the second little
flower.

Dark Side of the Spoon (Unlimited Matricks)

Hidden screen..

In the doors-field,the last door in the second row above

Delirious Demo 2 (Overlanders)

Hidden screen..

Click on the O of OVR in the title-screen.

Eternal Sounddemo 2 (Eternal)

Hidden screen.. Press H in the last screen.

Gateway to Hexenland (The Avengers)

Hidden screen..

After the big AVG is nearly below a little box. Fly on top of this box and
press SPACE.

Gen 4 Demo (Hemoroids)

Hidden screen..

Type in HMD in the loader-screen.

Hemo Sound 2 (Hemoroids)

Hidden screen..

Press UNDO in the first screen.

Hoby One Demo (The Voyager)

Hidden screen..

Type in TV in the mainmenu.

Just Buggin' (Alien Cracking Formation)

Hidden screen..

Type in ACF in the mainmenu.

Hidden picture..

Press in the "Just Feel It"-screen CONTROL.

Mathematica (Aura)

Hidden text..

Type in NONSENS in the endpart.

O-Demo (Oxygene)

Hidden screen..

Go right of the first teleporter and press SPACE. It's a loader for the
OXG-screens of the Genius Demo,also by OXG.

Ooh Crickey wot a Scorcher (The Lost Boys)

Hidden screen..

You can't get the hidden-screen from the demo. You must use a loader-
program. U find it on the stuff-disc of UC-mag 1.

Alternative menu..

Type in MANCHESTER in the mainmenu.

Phaleon Giga Demo (Next)

Hidden screen..

Press RESET in the intro.

Poltergeist Demo (Poltergeist)

Hidden screen..

Press HELP in the "Shoglo Screen". Type now one of the following codes to
get the hidden screen: 27182, 12345, 98765, 31415.

Hidden musix..

Press in the "Wings of Death Screen" F1 to F10 for the muzax of the game.

Punish Your Machine (Delta Force)

Hidden screen..

Type in HIDDENSCREENMAESIG in the mainmenu.

Hidden picture..

Press in the "When Colors Going Bang"-screen the key * .

Rip Dis (Lem & Nic)

Hidden screen..

Type in NIC in the "Colorshock"-screen. If you now loading another screen
then you get automatically the hidden screen.

Swedish New Year Demo 2 (Omega)

Hidden screen..

Press SHIFT left when you load the demo.

Synergy Megademo (Synergy)

Hidden keyz..

Press F10 in the mainmenu and you get the the big cube rotating very fast.

Syntax Terror (Delta Force)

Hidden screen..

1. Type in "Gesichtkondom" in the intro (press shift at the G). 2. Type in
HEMMELHERRGOTTSJESASWILLA in the mainmenu in the empty field above the
creditz.

The Definitve Demo (The Lost Boys)

Hidden keyz..

Go to the musix-screen and press HELP or UNDO. Now go back to the mainmenu
and load fast the bigscroll. You can now switch off the disc- control-routs
by pressing HELP or UNDO.

The Year After Demo (The Alliance)

Hidden screen..

Type in GIBS MIR in the "Hidden Screen".

Ultimate GFA Demo (The Overlanders)

Hidden screen..

Type in OVR in the mainmenu.

Undercover Magazin Issue 1 (The Naughty Bytes)

Hidden text..

Press "š" in the intro.

Union Demo (The Union)

----------------------

Hidden screen..

Go below of the TEX-logo and press fire.

Vodka Demo (Equinox)

Hidden screen..

Fly with the little fighter in the corner left above and shot above the NOT
ES

Yo Demo (The Black Cats)

Cheat.. Cheat for the mainmenu: In the pause-modus type in TMR for
invulnerability.

Hidden screen..

At the end of the level (?) shot up all groundstations > the credits arise
Press RETURN on a defined place (try out to find this place) and you get
the lamer-test.
